AT the age of twenty-two, a former ‘scout of the year’ excited the scientific
world with a new theory on how cells work. Richard H. Ebright and his
college room-mate explained the theory in an article in the Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science.
It was the first time this important scientific journal had ever
published the work of college students. In sports, that would be like
making the big leagues at the age of fifteen and hitting a home run
your first time at bat*. For Richard Ebright, it was the first in a long
string of achievements in science and other fields. And it all started
with butterflies.
An only child, Ebright grew up north of Reading, Pennsylvania.
“There wasn’t much I could do there,” he said. “I certainly couldn’t
play football or baseball with a team of one. But there was one thing I
could do — collect things.”
So he did, and did he ever! Beginning in kindergarten, Ebright
collected butterflies with the same determination that has marked all
his activities. He also collected rocks, fossils, and coins. He became
an eager astronomer, too, sometimes star-gazing all night.
From the first he had a driving curiosity along with a bright mind.
He also had a mother who encouraged his interest in learning. She
took him on trips, bought him telescopes, microscopes, cameras,
mounting materials, and other equipment and helped him in many
other ways.
“I was his only companion until he started school,” his mother
said. “After that I would bring home friends for him. But at night we
just did things together. Richie was my whole life after his father died
when Richie was in third grade.”
She and her son spent almost every evening at the dining room
table. “If he didn’t have things to do, I found work for him — not
physical work, but learning things,” his mother said. “He liked it.
He wanted to learn.”
And learn he did. He earned top grades in school. “On everyday
things he was just like every other kid,” his mother said.
By the time he was in the second grade, Ebright had collected all twenty-
five species of butterflies found around his hometown. 
“That probably would have been the end of my butterfly collecting,”
he said. “But then my mother got me a children’s book called The
Travels of Monarch X.” That book, which told how monarch butterflies
migrate to Central America, opened the world of science to the eager
young collector.
At the end of the book, readers were invited to help study butterfly
migrations. They were asked to tag butterflies for research by Dr
Frederick A. Urquhart of the University of Toronto, Canada. Ebright’s
mother wrote to Dr Urquhart, and soon Ebright was attaching light
adhesive tags to the wings of monarchs. Anyone who found a tagged
butterfly was asked to send the tag to Dr Urquhart.
The butterfly collecting season around Reading lasts six weeks in
late summer. (See graph below.) If you’re going to chase them one by
one, you won’t catch very many. So the next step for Ebright was to
raise a flock of butterflies. He would catch a female monarch, take her
eggs, and raise them in his basement through their life cycle, from egg
to caterpillar to pupa to adult butterfly. Then he would tag the butterflies’
wings and let them go. For several years his basement was home to
thousands of monarchs in different stages of development.