Cricket grew out of the many stick-and-
ball games played in England 500 years
ago. The word bat is an old English word that
simply means stick or club. By the seventeenth
century, cricket had evolved enough to be
recognisable as a distinct game. Till the middle of
the eighteenth century, bats were roughly the same
shape as hockey sticks, curving outwards at the
bottom. There was a simple reason for this: the ball
was bowled underarm, along the ground and the
curve at the end of the bat gave the batsman the
best chance of making contact.
One of the peculiarities of cricket is that a
Test match can go on for five days and still end
in a draw. No other modern team sport takes even
half as much time to complete. A football match
is generally over in an hour-and-a-half. Even
baseball completes nine innings in less than half
the time that it takes to play a limited-overs match,
the shortened version of modern cricket!
Another curious characteristic of cricket is that
the length of the pitch is specified 22 yards
but the size or shape of the ground is not. Most
other team sports such as hockey and football
lay down the dimensions of the playing area.
Cricket does not. Grounds can be oval like the
Adelaide Oval or nearly circular, like Chepauk in
Chennai. A six at the Melbourne Cricket Ground
needs to clear much more ground than it does at
Feroz Shah Kotla in Delhi.
There’s a historical reason behind both these
oddities. Cricket was the earliest modern team
sport to be codified. The first written Laws of
Cricket were drawn up in 1744. They stated,
the principals shall choose from amongst the
gentlemen present two umpires who shall
absolutely decide all disputes. The stumps must
be 22 inches high and the bail across them six
inches. The ball must be between five and six
ounces, and the two sets of stumps 22 yards
apart. The world’s first cricket club was formed
in Hambledon in the1760s and the Marylebone
Cricket Club  was founded in 1787.
During the 1760s and 1770s it became common
to pitch the ball through the air rather than roll
it along the ground. This change gave bowlers
the options of length, deception through the air,
plus increased pace. It also opened new
possibilities for spin and swing. In response,
batsmen had to master timing and shot
selection. One immediate result was the
replacement of the curved bat with the straight
one. The weight of the ball was limited to between
5 to 5.5 ounces, and the width of the bat to
four inches. In 1774, the first leg-before law was
published. Also around this time, a third stump
became common. By 1780, three days had
become the length of a major match, and this
year also saw the creation of the first six-seam
cricket ball.